---
categories:
- Linux
date: "2016-07-13T00:00:00Z"
excerpt: What is CDPATH and how to use it. A quick tip on navigation faster with cd
  using CDPATH.
tags:
  - linux
  - power-unix-tools
title: 'CDPATH: The lesser known path variable'
series:
  - Power Unix User
curated: true
---

`CDPATH` is an environment variable under UNIX, which is referred every time `cd` command is invoked.

## The working of `cd`
Let’s say you invoke the following command:
```bash
cd blog
```
The directory `blog` is looked in current working directory. If found, the current working directory is changed to that. If it is not found there, it is looked in every path in the `CDPATH` variable. Again if found, it is changed. If not then a directory not found message is displayed and cd returns 1 (Error code).

## Structure of `CDPATH` variable
`CDPATH` is similar to any other `PATH` variable for it contains several paths separated by colons.

Example:
```bash
/home/username/:/home/username/Desktop/:/home/username/workspace/:/home/username/toolkit/
```
can be content of `CDPATH` variable.

What this means is, the above directory `blog` is searched in all these directories one by one. If found, navigated to it.

### Multiple occurrences of a directory
Say that the directory `blog` is in `Desktop` as well as `workspace` . In such case, the first occurring parent will get precedence. And even before consulting the `CDPATH` the current working directory will get preference.

In fact, `CDPATH` is only referred if the directory is not found in current working directory. And when a directory is found in `CDPATH`, the `cd` command echos the complete path of directory where it has navigated to.

For example:

```bash
somedir>cd blog
blog>
```
will simply `cd` into `blog` directory. But if `blog` was not found in current working directory and instead found in `/home/username/Desktop`, the output will look something like this:

```bash
somedir>cd blog
/home/username/Desktop/blog
blog>
```
The line is for us to understand that we have been navigated somewhere far and not in the current working directory.

This is a very helpful tip for quick navigation. We don't have to type long path names every time. Frequent paths can be added to `CDPATH`. The best is, cd auto completion in terminal works with `CDPATH` and suggests paths from all the available directories!
