---
date: 2023-04-15
tags:
    - note taking
    - vscode
title: Dendron is neat alternative to note taking
pinned: true
category: Essay
---

I generally use Notion to keep my notes and journal but for office work, it's not a good idea to publish these notes to a third party application.

My second preferred way is open Visual Studio Code on a directory and start writing there. Group by projects, track the work with various extensions. But I needed a better tool to link the notes, tag them, categorize them - meeting notes, journal, ideas, etc.

## Search Results

One fine day I just searched 'take notes vscode' and this tool called Dendron turned up as the first result. Curious to explore it, I went through the wiki and they had me. One can easily find the value in the tool just by going through the wiki. You don't even have to try it.

## Breifly About Dendron

Few important features:

- No hierarchies
- Notes have schema namespaces and strucutre defined in schema.yml (as a programmer, I felt at home)
- Apart from a normal note, few special kind of notes - daily, scratch, journal, meeting and it nicely creates it with today's date
- Graph view, tags, backlinks
- Refactor the names
- Move around and links get corrected automatically

So it provides a structured way for me to write notes, track my projects and helps me keep all my findings in one place.

Best part - it comes as an extension. So no additional software requred. I can install it, if I don't need it, my notes are still plain old markdown notes which I can use with any tool. It has a small learning curve. Not as Emacs, but half a day is enough to get a hang of it and tune it to your needs.

If you were intrigued, I would definitely recommend you to go and check [their site](https://dendron.so/).
